Intuition. How hideously has the truth of it been bastardised to ‘instinct’ and animalism, a mechanism of ‘evolution’, cold, cruel and calculating. No further from the truth could this evaluation be. Intuition is the warmth of a man, that which paints the rays of a sun, photons beamed from outer space, into yellows, oranges, dandelion and chrysanthemum. Intuition precisely is the warmth, the ember that kindled the flourishing of man to perceive truly what is within himself and beyond himself. Intuition is the soul, imbued into man by God, by which we perceive things truly. 
The mind (returning to the prior imagery) can understand and comprehend that the sun is emitting light through photons that our eyes register as colours in a certain wavelength, and, even in our most classically educated, may see the symbol of such a phenomena as ‘life’, ‘vital’, and relate it to the divine, or the source of life as of fire, but his soul, his intuition, feels the truth of these things, feels the meaning. 
I think of my awkward love for Walt Whitman, the airy fairy non metred poet, potentially gay and a liberal too, and his incisive words around this precise topic;
When I heard the learn’d astronomer,
When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me,
When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them,
When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with much applause in the lecture-room,
How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick,
Till rising and gliding out I wander’d off by myself,
In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,
Look’d up in perfect silence at the stars.

Whitman here poses himself as the foil to the zeitgeist of his contemporaries, even during civil-war America (regressive as the current climate may view them), who increasingly adopted enlightenment and liberal ways of thinking. Whitman demonstrates here the truth that man (having deprived himself of his grasp of the intangible) clings to proofs, figures and the calculating and (truly) animal understanding of reality, whereas, Whitman, the true man, the poet, the soul bearer, the intuitive type, can emerge from the applause of society and it’s folly, and engage with reality in a spiritual fashion (Whitman himself being transformed, ‘rising and gliding’ away from his  peers). Now alone and separate from those around him, Whitman can engage with the wordless, intuitive grasp of reality, feeling and seeing (with his soul) the meaning of the stars that the learned astronomer “knew” so much about.
Whitman illustrates this all the more explicit in A Clear Midnight;
This is thy hour O Soul, thy free flight into the wordless,
Away from books, away from art, the day erased, the lesson done,
Thee fully forth emerging, silent, gazing, pondering the themes thou lovest best,
Night, sleep, death and the stars.
Need more be said? Whitman here talks directly to his soul, his intuition, and frees it from the shackles of the intellect imposed upon it by post-enlightenment society, allowing her to ‘fully forth’ emerge, to truly ponder (grasp and understand) the true meanings that Whitmans mind may encounter in his goings-about. See that the intuition ponders and understands not by words, deductive reasonings or syllogisms, but by quiet contemplation and perception.
